The crisis of humanism in our times undoubtedly originates in an experience of human inefficacy accentuated by the very abundance of our means of action and the scope of our ambitions. In a world where things are in place, where eyes, hands and feet can find them, where science extends the topography of perception and praxis even if it transfigures their space; in the places that lodge the cities and fields that humans inhabit, ranking themselves by varied groupings among the beings; in all this reality “in place,” the misconstruction [contre-sens] of vast failed undertakings—where politics and technology result in the negation of the projects they guide—teaches the inconsistency of man, mere plaything of his works. The unburied dead of wars and death camps accredit the idea of a death with no future, making tragicomic the care for one’s self and illusory the pretensions of the rational animal to a privileged place in the cosmos, capable of dominating and integrating the totality of being in a consciousness of self.

And consciousness of self, itself, disintegrates. Psychoanalysis attests to the instability and fallaciousness of the coincidence of self in the cogito, which however should stop the impostures of the evil genius and restore good-old-days security to a universe that has become wary on all sides. The coincidence with self in consciousness where, since Descartes, being is, shows itself to Others (and, after the fact, to the subject itself) as played or worked by impulses, influences, a language that composes a mask called a person, someone or no one [la personne ou personne], at the limit a personality endowed with purely empirical consistency. Then the world based on the cogito appears human, too human—to the point of having to look for truth in being, in a somehow superlative objectivity, pure of all “ideology,” without human traces.

One may of course wonder by what spirit of inconsequence antihumanism can still hold for man the discovery of true knowledge; doesn’t knowledge, in the last analysis, pass through consciousness of self? The social sciences—which consider nothing more doubtful than an Ego that listens to itself and questions itself (while its being would be going on outside of it), which consider nothing more horrible than the swarm of cultural significations approached from the interior by a subjectivity (whereas their formal expression simplifies and explains them)!—do these social sciences not draw on the mediation of a man of science?

But these old objections, certainly known to sociology and psychoanalysis of knowledge, do not have the last word. Because the formalist “refutation” that claims to triumph over subjectivist relativism (contesting subjectivity means asserting the value of the subjectivity that does the contesting!) does not escape the skeptical contestation reborn from its ashes, as if it were a discourse without a last word, as if the logos, which in itself is beginning, origin, apyn—correlative of the void without a past of freedom—were constantly submerged here by the preoriginal, as if subjectivity were not freedom of adhering to a term presented to it but passivity more passive than passivity of receptivity. The latter is again initiative of reception, able to assume that which collides with it. Consequently, it crosses the present of the logos or restores it to memory.’ In other words, the refutation of subjectivist relativism in the traditional form does not take into account the crisis it surmounts and believes itself in possession of the logos that, for an instant of ontological syncope, the meantime of nowhere, it had lost. By surmounting the relativism of the human it operates a recuperation. The truth obtained as if by ricochet in the explosion of truths and by the wear and tear of the real “right side out” is like the wrong side of the True. It’s as if, in metaphysics, the right side and the wrong side were the same. That is undoubtedly the sense of Husserl’s objection to Descartes when he reproaches him for identifying the “I am” of the cogito with the existence of a soul belonging to the world, that is, situating the absolute, uncovered in the destruction of the world, among the things of the world, as if they had never been engulfed in the “nowhere,” as if their suspension had been contingent, as if the being that came out of a coma in the cogito were still the same as the one that fell into it. Misunderstanding, as Jeanne Delhomme would say, of the modality, of what Heidegger calls the history of being. It makes possible, from the cogito, the return of God and the world, deduced according to traditional standards, whereas Kant and Husserl seek a new mode of foundation in the transcendental deduction of the object and in the énoyy of phenomenological reduction. This is something like a consciousness that thenceforth the foundation of being—metaphysics—turns inside out, is not done in being, is thought by ulterior motives [arriére-pensées] at the back of thoughts healthily attached to being. Isn’t the theme of the end of metaphysics, which is concomitant with the theme of the end of humanism, a way of saying this “reversal”? In fact, in our times, metaphysics keeps on ending and the end of metaphysics is our metaphysics, unavowed, because unequal to any avowal.

Nevertheless, the inconsequence of denouncing the absolute of the human in the name of evidence brought forth by the social sciences— where man is not only object but also subject—can pass for apparent. It would suffice to show the purely operative, temporary role of man in the unfolding and manifestation of a group of terms that make a system. Beyond the possibly “ideological” “objectivity” an order would be manifest where subjectivity is none other than the detour taken by the manifestation or intelligibility or truth of the order, in virtue precisely of that order. It is not man with any proper vocation who invents or seeks or possesses the truth. It is truth that arouses and holds man (without holding to him), a path where formal or logico-mathematical type structures enter to range and place themselves according to their ideal architecture, rejecting human scaffoldings that permit edification. Even if man’s existence—the being-there—consisted in existing in view of that existence itself, that ex-sistence, all those movements and reversals arousing and situating the human’ would be dedicated to caretaking or illuminating or obscuring or forgetting Being [l’étre], which is not in the being [étant]. Subjectivity would appear, in view of its own disappearance, as a moment necessary to the manifestation of the structure of Being, of the Idea. A moment almost in the temporal sense of momentary, transitory, passing, even if a whole history and a whole civilization is drawn in its passage. Yet this passage does not constitute a new dimension. Studied by structuralist anthropology as a reality itself made of structures, it belongs to an objective order that this anthropology only sets up and to which it is no exception. Subjectivity, the setting up of intelligible structures, would have no internal finality. We would witness the ruin of the myth of man as end in himself, giving way to the appearance of an order that is neither human nor inhuman, ordained of course through man and the civilizations he produces, but ordaining itself, in the last analysis, by the appropriately rational force of the dialectical or logico-formal system. A non-human order, suited to the name that is anonymity itself: matter.

To find man in that matter and a name in that anonymity—a being in that lunar landscape—must we not give value to the “transcendentals”: something or the One? Against the universality of structures and the impersonal essence of being—against the reciprocal relativity of points in a system—there has to be a point that counts for itself, and in the “Bacchic delirium when no limb escapes from drunkenness,” there needs to be a cell that is in itself sober. From the upsurge of the being in the matrix of something or on the model of the One in the heart of Being—that is, in the heart of what is called the Being of the being— would hang the essence of man. But we can also see the danger of such a demand: a return to the philosophy of substance, of material support, the thingification of man, whereas it was a matter of rendering him the utmost dignity. How do the one and the unique arise in essence? Seeking the matrix of the being in pleasure or the present, in the marvelous instant worthy of lasting or, more exactly, in time reposing in its hour, in happiness; countering the universality of reason, which is not a being, with the emotional resources hidden in the body and heart of man, means remaining attached to the idea of repose that suggests substance as the material support. Which gives us the being torn out of the anonymity of Being, falling and dissolving into nature.’ The rational animal as animal blends into nature; as rational it pales in the light where it brings to manifestation the Ideas, concepts returned to themselves, logical and mathematical sequences, structures.

## 2

The inefficacy of human action teaches us how precarious is the concept “man.” But to think human action on the level of labor and commandment is to approach it in its derivative forms. An action that is distinct from a simple repercussion of energy along a causal chain is the fact of beginning, of existing as origin and from an origin toward the future. It is then accomplished in the free inchoative—principled—character of consciousness. Consciousness is a mode of being such that beginning is its essential. To begin—to ignore or suspend the undefined density of the past—is the wonder of the present. All contents of consciousness were received, were present and consequently are present or represented, memorable. Consciousness is the very impossibility of a past that had never been present, that is closed to memory and history. Action, freedom, beginning, present, representation—memory and history—articulate in various ways the ontological modality that is consciousness. Nothing can enter fraudulently as a sort of contraband into a conscious ego without being exposed to avowal, without its equivalent in avowal, without making itself truth. Therefore, all rationality comes down to discovery of the origin, the principle. Reason is an archaeology, and the composite word archaeology is redundant. The intelligibility of the subject itself can only be this return to the origin, a movement that, according to Wissenschaftslehre, is the very being of the Ego, the “posing oneself” of the oneself. The reflexivity of the Ego is nothing other than the fact of being the origin of the origin.

But already in the infinite adjournment of the Sollen, which flows from the subject posed as Ego, origin of self or liberty, is announced the failure included in the human act and arises the anti-humanism that will reduce man to a milieu necessary to being so it can reflect itself and show itself in its truth, that is, in the systematic lineup of concepts. So then we may wonder: couldn’t humanism take on some sense if we thought through to the very limit the denial that being inflicts on freedom? Couldn’t a sense be found (sense “on the wrong side,” of course, but the only authentic sense here) to liberty itself, going from the very passivity of the human where its inconsistency seems to appear? Couldn’t this sense be found without getting pushed to the “Being of the being,” to system, to matter?

It would mean a new concept of passivity, a passivity more radical than that of effect in a causal series, beneath consciousness and knowledge, but also beneath the inertia of things reposing on itself as substances and opposing their nature, material cause, to all activity; it would mean a passivity referred to the wrong side of being, prior to the ontological plane where being is posed as nature, referred to the anteriority of creation, not yet having an outside, to meta-physical anteriority. As if beyond the ambit of a melody a higher or lower register resonated and mixed with the chords that are heard, but with a sonority that no voice can sing and no instrument can produce.’° Pre-original anteriority that could of course be called religious, if the term didn’t carry the risk of a theology impatient to recuperate “spiritualism”: present, representation and principles, precisely excluding the “beneath.”

To revive the inanity of the man-principle, the inanity of the Principle, doubts about freedom understood as origin and present, to seek subjectivity in radical passivity—is this not surrender to the fatality or determination that is the very abolition of the subject? Yes, if the alternative free/not free is ultimate, and subjectivity means stopping at the ultimate or the original. But this is precisely the point of our interrogation. Undoubtedly the Ego in its isolation, in the apparently absolute separation of the psyche and the sovereign liberty of representation, knows nothing beneath its freedom or outside the necessity that comes up against that freedom but is presented to it. It must, as Fichte argues, be its own source. It is absent from its birth and death, with no father and no murderer, and sentenced to give them to itself—to deduce them—deduce the non-ego from its liberty, at the risk of sinking into madness. The return to the ultimate or the original, to the principle, is already accomplished through the freedom of the Ego, which is the very beginning. The thesis and antithesis of the third Kantian antinomy imply the priority of the thesis, because the situation is not limited to themes: thesis and antithesis are presented to the consciousness which thematizes them and represents them to itself in the identity of the said, the logos,’ one and the other offered to a freedom for acceptance or refusal. Absolute non-freedom absolutely could not show itself. But the ego can be put in question by Others in an exceptional way. Not as by an obstacle that it can always measure, or by death that it can also give to itself;§ the Ego can be accused despite its innocence, by violence of course, but also, despite the separation where it is left by the exclusivism and insularity of the psychic, by Others who as such nevertheless “obsess” it and who, near or distant, impute to it a responsibility, unimpugnable as a traumatism, a responsibility for which it made no decision but cannot escape, enclosed in self. Reduced to silence it still gives a response from beneath the logos, as if its voice had a range of low or high notes beyond the low and high. Indeclinable subject, precisely as irreplaceable hostage of others, prior to the amphibology of Being and being, and to the condition of a nature.?

So one can speak of a “beyond the ultimate” or “pre-original” without their becoming, by that beyond or beneath, ultimate or original. The “beneath” or “pre-originary” or “pre-liminary” designates—by an abuse of language of course—this subjectivity prior to the Ego, prior to its freedom and non-freedom. Pre-original subject, outside of being, in self. Interiority is not described here in spatial terms as the volume of a sphere enveloped and sealed to Others but that, formed like consciousness, would also be reflected in the Said and thus belong to the space common to all, to the synchronic order, even if it had to be part of the most secret region of this sphere. Interiority is the fact that in being the beginning is preceded but that which precedes is not presented to the free gaze that would assume it, does not make itself present or representation; something already happened “over the head” of the present, did not pass through the cord of consciousness and does not let itself be recuperated; something that precedes the beginning and the principle, something that is, an-archically, despite being, reverses or precedes being. But is it really a something? The something resides in being, assumable and exterior. Here we are talking about an unassumable passivity that does not name itself or names itself only by abuse of language, pro-noun of subjectivity. The right side of being includes a wrong side that cannot turn inside out. But this expression is not the result of some kind of complacency for the unutterable and incommunicable. The unutterable or incommunicable of interiority that cannot hold in a Said is a responsibility prior to freedom. The unspeakability of the unutterable is described by the preoriginality of responsibility for others, by a responsibility prior to all free engagement, before describing itself by its inability to appear in the said.'° Therefore, the subject does not clash with being by a freedom that would make it master of things but by a preoriginary susceptibility’! more ancient than the origin, a susceptibility provoked in the subject,” where the provocation is never made present or logos offered for assumption or refusal and placed in the bipolar field of values. Through this susceptibility the subject is responsible for his responsibility, unable to escape from it without keeping a trace of his desertion." It is responsibility before being intentionality.

## 3

But isn’t this servitude? Not being able to get out of responsibility? How can this passivity place the subject “beyond freedom and non-freedom”? How is the susceptibility of pre-originary responsibility prior to confrontation with the logos, to its presence, prior to the beginning that is presented (or presentified) to the agreement one grants or refuses to the logos, how is this not enslavement? Why does the subject, banished in self, held at bay by responsibility, brought back to its irreplaceable unicity by this irrefusable responsibility, exalt in the irrefusability of the One?

If determination by the Other is to be called servitude the determined must remain other with regard to that which determines it. In fact, true and simple determinism is not servitude for any of the terms that constitute the unity of an order. If the determined is to be other with regard to that which determines it, however, it has to be free; it must keep a memory of the present when the determining determined it and was its contemporary. This power of reminiscence is precisely what escaped determination, the part—be it infinitesimal—of freedom necessary for the condition of servitude. Absolute passivity, where the determining term was never presented to the determined, not even in memory, is equivalent to determinism. Is determinism beyond freedom and servitude? Certainly. But subjectivity is beneath the determinism-servitude alternative. The rendezvous of presentation of the determinant to the determined, to which one would want to carry the origin of responsibility, may have been impossible if the determinant is the Good, which is not the object of a choice because it is seized by the subject before the subject has had the time—that is, the distance—necessary for choice. There is no enslavement more complete than this seizure by the good, this election. But the enslaving character of responsibility that overflows choice—of obedience prior to the presentation or representation of the commandment that obliges to responsibility— is canceled by the bounty of the Good that commands." Beneath enslavement the obedient finds his integrity. Irrefusable responsibility nonetheless never assumed in complete freedom, is good. The seizure by the good, the passivity of “enduring the good,” is a more profound contraction than moving the lips in imitation of that contraction to articulate the yes. Here ethics makes its entry into the philosophic discourse— rigorously ontological at the start—as an extreme reversal of its possibilities. Starting from a radical passivity of subjectivity it reached the notion of “a responsibility overflowing freedom” (whereas only freedom should be able to justify and limit responsibilities), an obedience prior to the reception of orders; from this anarchic situation of responsibility, the analysis—undoubtedly by abuse of language— named the Good.

To be dominated by the Good does not mean choosing the Good from a position of neutrality in the face of an axiologic bipolarity. The concept of such a bipolarity already refers to freedom, to the absolute of the present, and would mean the impossibility of going beneath the principle to the absolute of knowledge. However, to be dominated by the Good is precisely to exclude for oneself the very possibility of choice, of coexistence in the present. Here the impossibility of choice is not the result of violence—fatalism or determinism—it is unimpugnable election by the Good that, for the elected, is always already accomplished. Election by the Good that is, precisely, not action; it is non-violence itself. Election meaning nomination of the non-interchangeable. Whence passivity more passive than all passivity, filial, but pre-liminary pre-logical subjection, subjection to a unique sense that it would be wrong to understand as coming from a dialogue. The passivity, unconvertible into present, is not a simple effect of a Good which would be reconstructed as cause of this effect; the Good is in this passivity, the Good that strictly speaking doesn’t have to be and is not, except by bounty. The passivity is the being of the beyond being of the Good, which language rightfully circumscribes—as usual by betraying—with the word non-being; passivity is the place [liew]—or more exactly the no place {[non-lieu|—of the Good, its exception to the rule of being, ever unveiled in the logos, its exception to the present.!> Plato recalls the long travails of the eye that tries to fix the sun in its sojourn. But the sun is not forever removed from the gaze. The invisible of the Bible is the idea of the Good beyond being.

To be obliged to responsibility has no beginning. Not in the sense of some sort of perpetuity or of a perpetuity that would claim to be eternity (which is probably the extrapolation that gives “bad infinity”) but the sense of an inconvertibility into an assumable present. A notion that is not purely negative. It is responsibility overflowing liberty, that is, responsibility for others. It is the trace of a past that refuses itself to the present and to representation, the trace of an immemorial past.

It is by the Good that the obligation to responsibility—irrevocable, irreversible, unimpugnable but not going back to a choice—is not a violence that would collide with a choice; it situates an “interiority” preceding freedom and non-freedom, outside axiologic bipolarity, an obedience to a unique value without anti-value, that is inescapable!* but that, “related” to the subject, is neither chosen nor non-chosen, and where the subject is elected, and keeps the trace of election. A value never offered as theme, not present, not represented and that, so as not to be thematized, not begin, is more antique than the principle and, in an immemorial past without present, by the ambiguity and the antiquity of the trace, non-absent. A value that, by abuse of language, is named. A value that is named God. Thematization would turn the preoriginal passivity of the elected submitting to election into choice made by the subject, and would turn subjectivity—or subjection—into usurpation. The subjectivity of the in-itself is like obedience to an order accomplished before the order makes itself heard: anarchy itself. The subject as Ego stands already in freedom, beyond self, beyond the relation to the pre-original, the pre-liminary, beyond pure passivity more ancient than that which, its inertia colliding with activity, supposes it. Pure passivity preceding freedom is responsibility. But the responsibility that owes nothing to my freedom is my responsibility for the freedom of others. There where I could have remained spectator, I am responsible, that is to say again, speaking. Nothing is theater anymore, the drama is no longer a game. Everything is serious.’

## 4

But nothing in the passivity of possession by the Good where the Good is—whereas strictly speaking it doesn’t have to be and is not unless by bounty—becomes a natural tendency. The relation with the Other is not converted into nature or promise of happiness enfolding this relation with the Other in happiness. The passivity where the Good is, is not made Eros; nothing in this passivity suppresses the trace of the Other in his virility to bring Other back to Same. The anarchic bond between the subject and the Good—a bond that cannot be tied as assumption of a principle that by whatever rights would be present to the subject in choice, but rather an anarchic bond tied without the subject being will—is not the constitution of a “divine instinct” of responsibility, an “altruistic or generous nature,” a “natural bounty.” It ties up with an outside. This exteriority of the covenant is maintained precisely in the effort demanded by responsibility for others, foreign to Eros as to enthusiasm (possession where the difference between possessing and possessed disappears). But it needs the temptation of the facility of rupture, the erotic attraction of irresponsibility that, through a responsibility limited by the freedom of he “who is not his brother’s keeper,” portends the Evil of the absolute freedom of play. Whence comes the seduction of irresponsibility in the heart of submission to the Good, the probability of egoism in the subject responsible for his responsibility, that is to say the very birth of the Ego in obedient will.

This temptation to separate from the Good is the very embodiment of the subject’® or its presence in being. But it is not because the Ego is an embodied soul that temptation disturbs the obedience preliminary to the Good and promises man the sovereign choice; it is because obedience without servitude to the Good is obedience to an other remaining other, that the subject is carnal, on the edge of Eros, and makes itself being.

The essence of Evil is its insurmountable ambiguity. It may be that easy seductive evil cannot rupture the passivity of the pre-liminary prehistoric subjection, annihilate the beneath, repudiate what the subject never contracted. Evil shows itself as sin, that is, responsibility in spite of itself for refusing responsibilities. Neither beside nor facing Good, but in second place, under, lower than Good. Being persevering in being, egoism or Evil, designates the very dimension of lowliness and the birth of hierarchy. That is where axiologic bipolarity begins. But Evil claims to be a contemporary, an equal, the twin brother of Good. Irrefutable lie, Luciferian lie. Without he who is the very egoism of the Ego posing as its own origin—uncreated—sovereign principle, prince, without the impossibility of climbing down from this pride, the anarchic submission to Good would not be an-archic anymore, it would be equivalent to the demonstration of God, to theology treating God as if he belonged to being or to perception, it would be equivalent to the optimism that theology can teach and religion must hope for, but philosophy must not speak. This silence can be taken for the dissolving of man in being that tempts him and where he enters. Modern anti-humanism is undoubtedly right in not finding in man taken as individual of a genus or an ontological reason—an individual like all substances persevering in being— a privilege that makes him the aim of reality.

But the Ego brought down to Self, responsible in spite of itself, abrogates the egoism of the conatus and introduces sense into being. There can be no sense in being except for sense that is not measured by being. Death renders senseless all care the Ego would like to have for its existence and destiny. An enterprise with no outcome and always ridiculous; nothing is more comical than the care for itself taken by a being doomed to destruction, which is just as absurd as questioning, in view of action, the stars whose verdict cannot be appealed. Nothing is more comical or nothing is more tragic. It pertains to the same man to be tragic and comic. But the pre-original responsibility for the other is not measured by being, is not preceded by a decision, and cannot be reduced to absurdity by death. To pleasure, the only thing that can make us forget the tragicomedy of being and that may well be defined by this forgetting, death comes calling like a denial as it finishes off the sacrifice of unimpugnable responsibility. No one, not even the promisers of religion, is hypocritical enough to claim that he took away death’s sting; but we may have responsibilities for which we must consent to death. The Other concerns me despite myself.

If one had the right to retain a single feature of a philosophic system while neglecting the details of its architecture—though there are no details in architecture, according to Valéry, and in philosophy it is the detail that keeps the ensemble from leaning—we would evoke Kant here: to find a sense to the human without measuring it by ontology, without knowing and without wondering “what about [qu’en est-il de] ... Outside mortality and immortality—this may well be the Copernican revolution.

From a responsibility even more ancient than the conatus of substance, more ancient than the beginning and the principle, from the anarchic, the ego returned to self, responsible for Others, hostage of everyone, that is, substituted for everyone by its very non-interchangeability, hostage of all the others who, precisely others, do not belong to the same genus as the ego because I am responsible for them without concerning myself about their responsibility for me because I am, in the last analysis and from the start, even responsible for that, the ego, I; 1 am man holding up the universe “full of all things.” Responsibility or saying prior to Being and beings, not saying itself in ontological categories. Modern anti-humanism may be wrong in not finding for man, lost in history and in order, the trace of this pre-historic an-archic saying.